# getting-and-cleaning-course-project

The purpose of this script is to combine the test and training dataset from the UCI HAR Dataset (found here: https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip),which contains experiment data from observing 30 test subjects wearing Samsung Galaxy S II smart phones around their waists and collecting data from the smartphones' sensors while the subjects performed different activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING). The dataset generated by this script contains the average mean and standard deviations of each measurement across each test subject and each activity.

For more detailed descriptions of each variable, please see CodeBook.md (https://github.com/gklaus/getting-and-cleaning-course-project/blob/master/CodeBook.md).

The first step in this script is to load the dplyr and reshape packages, as functions from both packages are used in this script.

Next, we read in the txt file that contains the names of each measurement variable in the raw data (features.txt), and keep only mean and standard deviation measurements in a new data.frame called keep_features, which includes the column numbers for each column we want to keep in the measurement datasets (X_train.txt and X_test.txt) as well as the corresponding column name.

Then, we read in the activity_labels.txt files, which matches the numerical code for each activity to it's description (e.g., 1 corresponds to "WALKING"), and then we name the column with that contains the descriptions of each activity "labels", all stored in a data frame called act_labels.

In the next set of steps, we read and clean the training sets, which contain the actual measurement data for each subject. When reading in the X_train.txt, which contains the measurements for each subject, we keep only only the columns that remain in the keep_features data.frame created earlier. The resulting data is stored in a data frame called x_train. We then read in the Y_train.txt file, which contains the numerical activity labels for each measurement, and then effectively replace the numerical labels with their descriptions by merging the act_labels data frame with the Y_train.txt file, for which the resulting data is stored in a data frame called y_train. Then we read in the subject_train.txt file, which contains the subject ID numbers for each measurement, into a vector called subj_train. Then we combine the columns in x_train, y_train, and subj_train to for train_set.

The steps above can be repeated with the corresponding test datasets to for test_set.

Once training_set and test_set have been created, we use rbind to append the two data frames together to form a complete set of all of the training and test data in a new data frame called data_set.

We can then reshape data_set to create a long form dataset that contains the average mean and standard deviation of each measurement for each combination of subject and activity. To do this, we first melt data_set and store the results in a data frame called data_melt. In the final steps, we cast the data_melt such that it returns the averages of each measurement across each combination of subject and activity, and then write the file in a txt file called gacd_tidy_data.txt.

When reading in gacd_tidy_data.txt, use read.table and set header = TRUE so the column names read in correctly.
